The Covid-19 induced lockdown has exposed the digital divide between the rich and poor, especially when it comes to the education sector.
Private institutions, including schools, were able to conduct online teaching and learning while those from poor families with no access to data, laptops or smartphones, were left in limbo.

Sunday Independent spoke to two pupils, one from a private school and one from a public school, to gauge how their education has been impacted during the lockdown.
The pupil from the private school said the lockdown never really halted his education process.
“We have been doing our school work since the lockdown started.

We continued with classes online until our school holidays,” he said.
It was, however, a different story for some from the impoverished public schools.
“I have been at home since the president said we should not go to school. Unfortunately, I don’t have access to the internet or a cellphone, so even the materials that were said to be available, were very difficult for me to access,” said a learner.

He added that he could only do revision by watching educational programmes on television.
President Cyril Ramaphosa, in March, announced that schools would close two days early for the Easter holidays but were never opened as the country enforced a lockdown to deal with the Covid-19 outbreak.
However, with schools resuming classes today, it will only be matriculants and Grade 7 pupils who would be returning to classes.

Technology expert Siphumelele Zondi said Covid-19 exposed the inequalities in the country, especially to the technological divide.
He said it was up to the government to close the gap and ensure that data becomes affordable so more people can access the internet.
He said the recent announcement by network companies that prices had dropped were just smokescreens.

“Tighter regulations are needed on data pricing. Prices dropped, but not that much. You can’t tell me that someone who is offering R29 a gig, but it’s only available for one day, that they have dropped prices. Yes, it’s cheaper than what you would pay for if you buy a gig for a month, but you must use it in one day. There needs to be tighter regulations regarding how much can be charged,” he said.
Apart from the disruptions to the education sector, Zondi said Covid-19 has also thrown a lot of companies into disarray and forced them to re-evaluate how they operate. One of the biggest adjustments is that employees be allowed to work from home and not expected to be physically in the building to be considered to be working.
“A mindset change is required. You find a lot of managers who still struggle with the idea that people can work outside the office and that you don’t need to be seen to be considered to be doing some work. There are tools that can assist you to work remotely.

“Post-Covid-19, a lot of that will stay, but how many people, especially in South Africa and on the African continent, will allow it? It’s a massive mindset change,” he said.
Zondi added that Covid-19 exposed all the companies that have been refusing to adapt to technology, but were forced to do so or risk shutting down.
“It’s not to say these tools were not here. It’s just that Covid was the thing that forced the digital disruption on people who were resisting technology. It showed them what was always possible,” he said.

Many companies have expected people to work from home, but not all of them were providing employees with data. According to those surveyed by Sunday Independent, their normal monthly data plans that were always thought to be sufficient, ran out mid-month due to having to be online for longer periods.
Zondi said companies need to stop paying for office internet and channel that money to employees so that they can have internet at home.
“This is where companies need to come to the table and realise that people should not be using their own data to work from home. They need to supply employees with data to work away from the office because they are no longer using the internet at work but the one at their houses,” he said.

“The digital disruption has happened and we can’t avoid it but how we respond to it will determine what the future is for us. Data or internet connection is the new oil.”
The Sunday Independent