The conniving and controlling David Genaro, who kept viewers glued to e.tv’s Rhythm City, is no more. And this time for good, with no chances of “waking from the dead”. The show’s fans, some from as far afield as Ghana, Uganda and Botswana, were divided on Wednesday evening when the villainous character, played by seasoned actor Jamie Bartlett, finally met his maker in a dramatic twist. Fans took to social media, lauding Bartlett as the GOAT - greatest of all time. After 13 years of portraying the character that viewers love to hate, Genaro was not going to be wrapped up without an epic send-off to one of Mzansi’s most loved actors. The show hosted a fitting tribute to the larger-than-life actor at Hyde Park Corner, where an emotional Bartlett shed tears of joy for the moving event while coming to terms with the end of the character he had come to love. “I think Genaro has meandered through 13 years with the most incredible opportunities to paint and tell stories. And because of my age, I am at a point where I am now wondering about what I want to do for the next 25 summers and where I want to be. I’ve dedicated/surrendered myself entirely to this piece of work, allowing myself to be completely colonised by the character, and I do feel like the journey is over,” said the 53-year-old. As one of the founding cast members of the soap opera that launched in 2007, Bartlett said he had an opportunity to develop Genaro, from his wardrobe to his dialogue. He was hands-on throughout the character’s evolution up until the end. “And I am really, really proud of what he became,” said the star, with tears welling in his eyes. “I got the opportunity to create him, from the symbolic tattoo, which represents immortality in Japanese, to the way I infused my knowledge of the classics using metaphorical language and always hiding him (Genaro) in metaphors. I’ve walked with the character for so long that now he is going to need an indelible separation,” he said.     Bartlett’s career spans more than 36 years, having worked on different mediums such as theatre, small screen and in local and international films, starring alongside some of the greats such as Angelina Jolie (Beyond Borders), Hilary Swank (Red Dust) and in notable films such as Long Walk to Freedom and directed by various Oscar winners. Reflecting on the 13 years, he said a lot had changed in his personal life, from the passing of his father, watching his son grow up, to falling victim to crime numerous times, falling in and out of love and travelling across the African continent - all these happening with David Genaro by his side. Bartlett’s next move is to give back to the industry that has given so much to him by partnering with The Finishing College, where he will teach acting. He will also host master classes for corporates and groups, with opportunities as far afield as Kenya. The Sunday Independent