The year has only just begun but TV personality Somizi Mhlongo and Mohale Motaung’s white wedding ceremony has set the bar so high, it has been branded the wedding of the year. The couple’s exclusive wedding extravaganza followed their much talked about traditional wedding that took place in September last year in Kibler Park, which also broke the internet. Traditionally, it is only the bride who wears white on her special day. However, this eccentric couple invited guests, mainly celebrities, to dress in white and red-bottomed shoes - a reference to Christian Louboutin designer shoes. The invitation read, “White is the colour of perfection, purity and a symbol of wholeness and completion. And for our wedding, we ask that you honour the colour and all that it represents.” In a move that shows how business savvy Somgaga (Somizi) has become, the wedding will premiere exclusively on Showmax in a four-part wedding special that will also incorporate their traditional wedding. #Somhale, as they are known on social media streets, are the first couple to have their wedding special air exclusively on Showmax. The wedding, Somizi & Mohale: The Union, promises to explore their intimate love story that also touches on “Somhale’s” trials and tribulations and acknowledging the symbolic message their union sends to the African continent, “that when all is said and done, love will always win.” To keep the celebrations under wraps until they share with the rest of the world, guests were asked not to take pictures or videos of the celebrations. However, that did not stop their celebrity guests from taking to their social media handles to share their glamorous outfits before witnessing the much-loved couple walk down the aisle.     Minnie Dlamini Jones looks good, love it❤❤#SomhaleUnion#Somhalewhitewedding pic.twitter.com/6Mdlz9sqPa  Occasion : #SomhaleUnionTitle : Favorite nephew who is always lateMood: Didnt get the all white memo so Uncle Somgaga is gonna kill me mara se fikile. Catch all the drama on exclusively on .@ShowmaxOnline on 24 Feburary. pic.twitter.com/fuitWSpzSJ  I’ve been on this incredible journey with my friends @somizi @mohale_motaung . today we fit the last piece of the puzzle... #SomhaleUnion ends with #SomhaleWhiteWedding... all will be seen exclusively on @showmaxonline from 24 February ❤ pic.twitter.com/QWqjN0JF1A   Long-time best friend TT Mbha, who has seen Somizi through many ups and downs, expressed his excitement at witnessing the pair’s incredible journey, saying the wedding day marked a moment where they fit the last piece of the puzzle to the #SomhaleUnion journey. Rapper and media personality Boity Thulo dubbed the pair’s wedding the “greatest celebration of love” she has ever witnessed, while actor Ayanda Makayi, congratulated the couple saying: “When kings get married, you show up looking like royalty! Wishing you nothing but eternal love and happiness.” Actress and entrepreneur Winnie Ntshaba gushed about how much she loved seeing people express their love for each other, just the way these two (Somizi and Mohale) do it. Others that showered the pair with love were lovers Renate Stuurman and Vuyo Ngcukana, Somizi’s make-up artist Diva Cadach, Khanyi Mbau, Judith Sephuma, Moshe Ndiki, DJ Zinhle, Lerato Kganyago and Bonang Matheba - with internationally acclaimed DJ Black Coffee playing at the do. The Sunday Independent