Gauteng’s top science teacher, Moreki Ancell Mosuane, believes teaching science to pupils from the poor community of Lufhereng, on the West Rand is his way of ensuring that he empowers them with tools to escape from poverty. Made up of mobile classes, Lufhereng Secondary School, may not have state-of-the-art laboratory and science equipment, yet it boasts a gem in the enthusiastic young teacher who is on a mission to inspire the school’s grade 8 to 11 pupils to use science as a stepping stone to a bigger world. “I don’t just teach science but I introduce it as an everyday thing, from things that surround us to our daily activities - and it is in that way that makes learners want to be a part of it,” said the 26-year-old educator who described his pupils as highly driven, focused and willing to learn. Mosuane and the school’s deputy principal, Mpho Matloga - also a science teacher - raised funds and asked for donations to establish the school’s modest science laboratory. They also dug deep into their pockets to make it a reality. “A lot of these children don’t leave this township. They’ll never get to explore the different facets of science, therefore limiting their understanding of it. I want to give them that, a lab that will expand their understanding of science and ignite their interests. That’s the only way we can debunk the myth that black communities fail in science because they are stupid, whereas the truth is that we just lack access.” Mosuane’s first job was teaching science and technology to Grade 4s at Lufhereng Primary before transferring to the high school when it opened five years ago. His exuberant and unique teaching methods have yielded great results over the years. Last year, his Grade 8 pupils achieved a 90% pass rate in physical science, while Grade 9s achieved 80%, Grade 10s excelled with a 100% pass rate and Grade 11s got 90%. That Mosuane, who won the excellence in teaching natural sciences award at Gauteng’s National Teachers Awards in October, did not plan to become a teacher is rather surprising. He said his dream had been to become a medical doctor. However, due to delays with his documentation he could not apply for medicine at Wits University and instead opted for the education faculty, which led him to his passion. “I don’t see myself doing anything else, at this point,” he said. He brings his own equipment from home to improve lessons and also forms part of various departments and serves on various bodies at the school such as assisting on the committee that looks after orphans, domestic violence issues, HIV/Aids and also offers pupil support. The teacher, who is originally from Lesotho, draws most of his inspiration from his own indigent upbringing. To afford him access to better education, his parents sent him to Katlehong, in Ekurhuleni, where at the age of 13 he was responsible for caring for his younger sister and running their child-headed home. This month, Mosuane will represent Gauteng at the National Teachers Awards in the Excellence in teaching Natural Sciences category against winners from eight provinces. He hoped to bring back the top honour to Lufhereng. “I am committed to bringing change into the lives of the learners that I interact with and to give back to the education system, because I truly believe that education is a necessary tool to save someone from poverty - just like it was in my life. These awards are just a bypass of what I love doing,” he added. The Sunday Independent